Good morning - I want to welcome all of you and in particular those
watching in the overflow room or participating by webcast. The slides
you just saw highlighted some of the accomplishments of Georgia Tech
faculty, staff and students. While we all know some of the amazing
things going on at Georgia Tech, when you see them all rolled up
together, it is very impressive and gives a big picture perspective of
all the many the things we’re doing at Georgia Tech to change the world.


          *Strategic Plan Progress*

Three years ago this month we formally initiated the development of our
25-year Strategic Plan, Designing the Future
<http://www.gatech.edu/vision>, and a year later we formally launched
it. Thanks to the continuing engagement of the Georgia Tech community,
we have made solid progress, and I continue to be impressed by the
collaborative and innovative spirit of those working on the various
aspects of the plan.

The true sign of success in this type of endeavor is when it ceases to
remain as a stand-alone document and becomes woven into the fabric of
the Institute. These leaders of the 15 active projects
<http://gatech.edu/vision/projects> are joining with hundreds of other
faculty, staff, and students who are engaged in bringing our Strategic
Plan to life. I would like to ask the Strategic Plan - Project Team
co-chairs, as well as the project liaisons, to stand. Please join me in
thanking them for all of their efforts on our behalf.

Today we will touch on the progress we have made towards the goals
outlined in our strategic plan as we also examine the many challenges
and opportunities that lie ahead for Georgia Tech.


          *Facilities*

In case you were wondering, this is Georgia Tech, not Google. While the
recent filming of a movie has presented challenges for some and
inconvenienced others, it has provided a unique insight into how movies
are produced. In selecting the Georgia Tech campus for the film, the
producers were seeking a forward looking space and one that was
representative of the best in technology.

About 200 members of the Tech community have participated in the
filming, either as extras or by working on the set. Some people have
asked how this all worked – we submitted a bid designed to cover any
expenses incurred as a result of the filming. We agreed to allow the
filming on campus for the intangible benefits we anticipate once the
movie is released. 

I want to thank those of you who have been inconvenienced, either by
having to park in other places, select new routes through campus, or
find new places to study, meet, or get coffee. I also want to thank all
of the groups who have been involved in helping with the project,
including the Georgia Tech Police Department, Capital Planning and Space
Management, Parking and Transportation, Dining Services, the Clough
Commons staff and all of the building managers and staff in the other
facilities that were used.


          *Clough Commons*

Speaking of facilities, since we opened the Clough Commons
<http://clough.gatech.edu/> a year ago, there have been more than 2.1
million visits, or approximately 12,000 student visits every day.

You can find students here just about any time of day or night. In fact,
last spring, I invited Kevin Riley, editor of the Atlanta Journal
Constitution, to join me in a ride-along with the Georgia Tech police.
We stopped in Clough Commons, and he asked me what all the students were
doing there at 1 in the morning. I told him “This is Georgia Tech.
They’re studying and working on group projects.”

It is a wonderful facility and while Google may have brought in the
spaceship, we already had a whale and a cabin in the lobby, built by
Georgia Tech students. They were projects from Professor Hugh Crawford’s
classes that have become immensely popular because of the innovative
teaching approach he employs.


          *Facilities through Partnerships*

It is easy to see why the film company would want to film at Georgia
Tech. Our campus is impressive, and through a combination of private
philanthropy, state and industry support, we are continuing to ensure
that we have the facilities we need to accomplish the ambitious goals we
have established.

There are a number of projects in various stages of completion. In less
than a week, we take occupancy of the new McCamish Pavilion, and just
across the street is the new Ken Byers Tennis Complex that will open in
January. The new Carbon Neutral Energy Solutions, or CNES building on
North Avenues, is designed to set a new standard for sustainable design
for buildings of its type. And, just this past week, we learned that it
has been selected for the ENR Southeast Best Project Award and also the
Georgia Chapter of the ASLA 2012 Design Award.

Further west on 10th street, construction is underway on the new
Engineered Biosystems Building, made possible by a commitment from the
state as well as institutional and private funds. This facility will
allow us to continue to improve and expand our world-class activities in
the biotechnology arena and will provide an economic boost to the state
by fueling Georgia’s growing biotechnology industry. We have spread the
Civil and Environmental Engineering faculty and staff all over campus as
we undertake a $10.5 million renovation of the Mason building. And
finally, we continue the phased renovation of our residence halls and
student dining facilities.


          *Changing the Way We Educate Students*

Georgia Tech is fortunate to have some of the brightest and
best-qualified students in the world and these new facilities are
helping us to change the way we educate them, in order to help create an
environment where they can succeed and reach their full potential. We
are also working to enrich the student experience by taking advantage of
new technologies and instructional methods, while at the same time
creating opportunities for increased student/faculty interaction.

The universities of the future will embrace both new technologies and
teaching methodologies that expand their reach, and maximize their
effectiveness, through teaching methods such as Vertically Integrated
Projects that foster innovative thinking and entrepreneurial behavior.

We have some outstanding faculty at Georgia Tech, who are leading the
way in the development of new educational methodologies and who are
changing the way we educate our students. Today it is my pleasure to
share with you that two nominees from Georgia Tech have been selected as
recipients of the Regents’ Teaching Excellence and Scholarship Awards
for FY2013.

Steve Potter, associate professor in the Laboratory for NeuroEngineering
<http://www.bme.gatech.edu/facultystaff/faculty_record.php?id=39>, won
in the faculty category for research universities. Professor Potter
engages his students through a personal, discussion oriented approach,
by exposing them to actual research and challenging them to create
YouTube videos to explain research to lay people. I believe that
Professor Potter is here with us today.

The second award goes to the Wallace H. Coulter Department of Biomedical
Engineering <http://www.bme.gatech.edu/index.php>won the
program/department category across the entire University System for
their implementation of an innovative problem-driven learning approach.
Please join me in congratulating them.

Since we launched the Center for 21st Century Universities, or C21U
<http://c21u.gatech.edu/>under the direction of Rich DeMillo last fall,
faculty from Management, Public Policy, and Industrial & Systems
Engineering have come together to focus on the role of disruptive
technologies, serving as a living laboratory for testing new
transformational educational ideas and approaches.

We recently announced an agreement with Coursera
<http://provost.gatech.edu/hg/item/140591>, a spinout of Stanford to put
web-based courses online and create new educational opportunities
outside of the traditional classroom and to provide opportunities for
lifelong learning for people throughout the world.

Tech is a founding member of a small group of highly respected
university partners in this bold experiment in the future of education.
I just learned yesterday that we have over 57,000 students signed up for
our first five courses. We also have a number of other similar projects
and partnerships in the works that will ensure that Georgia Tech is on
the cutting edge in this area.

Several of the Strategic Plan project teams are focusing on changing the
way we teach and creating new and exciting approaches - things like the
Burdell Design Center, the X-Degree, Technology and the Law, and others.
Details on these and other initiatives can be found on the Strategic
Plan web site.

It’s important to note that while we remain committed to our primary
focus of residential undergraduate and graduate instruction, these
activities will give us the opportunity to investigate new methods and
approaches and thereby improve our traditional courses.


          *Our Outstanding Students*

This fall, our student body includes 21,566 undergraduate and graduate
students from 127 countries, including the largest, best qualified, and
most diverse freshman class in Georgia Tech history. The fall 2012
freshman class includes students from 65 countries. The average SAT of
the new freshman class is 1394. The average GPA is 3.89 and over half of
them have a 4.0 in high school. Many of these students have been
involved in leadership activities before they step foot on campus.

This year as we celebrate the 60th anniversary of the admission of women
at Georgia Tech, our freshman class includes 35 percent women, the
largest number of women ever enrolled. Our undergraduate student body
includes 33 percent women.

In addition, in the past three years, we have increased the number of
underrepresented minorities in the freshman class by 48 percent.

This success is the direct result of the efforts of many of you who over
the years have been working to attract an exceptionally well qualified
and diverse student body. I would like to take this opportunity to thank
all of you who have worked continuously through the years to help us
attract the best and the brightest students. Your efforts are continuing
to help us attract a wonderful group of students and we owe much of our
reputation for excellence to your efforts.


          *Commitment to Diversity*

Georgia Tech’s commitment to diversity has never been stronger. We see
it in increased diversity in our student body, and our staff, and are
making great inroads in faculty diversity.

As you can see from the slides our statistics in various categories
represent dramatic increases. (Freshman class since Fall 2008:
Black/African American students up 24 percent. Hispanic students up 76
percent. Students of two or more races up 118 percent. Overall student
body since Fall 2008: Black/African American students up 7 percent;
Hispanic students up 33 percent; overall increase in underrepresented
minorities 19 percent) Again, this is a reflection of the commitment of
our staff. While the statistics are dramatic, our original numbers were
low. We still have much work to do. We aspire to be an institution that
pursues excellence and embraces and leverages diversity in all of its
forms to benefit the entire Tech community.


          *Co-op*

2012 is also the 100th anniversary of our cooperative education program
<http://coop.gatech.edu/>, the largest voluntary co-op program in the
nation.

More than 50,000 students have participated in Tech’s co-op program over
the past century, and there are 4,000 current undergraduate and graduate
co-op students. It’s a great way to earn money for college while gaining
valuable work experience that gives you a competitive edge upon graduation.

I invite you to join us back here in Clough Commons on September 18 for
the co-op celebration.

Co-op is just one of the many ways our students can maximize their time
at Tech. It is our hope that many of them will participate in a number
of the more than 450 student organizations, or be included with the more
than 40 percent of Tech’s students who participate in an international
experience. It is the combination of these experiences that helps to
prepare them as leaders in an ever-changing world.


          *Safety*

As we begin the academic year, I want to take a few minutes to focus on
safety. The safety and security of Georgia Tech students, faculty, and
staff is our top priority. Some of the current initiatives are listed here.

  * 5,000 signed up for Jacket Guardian www.guardian.gatech.edu
    <http://www.guardian.gatech.edu>
  * 1,000 security cameras, 400 emergency phones
  * Adding 5 sworn officers, force of 82
  * Enhanced and high-visibility point patrols with Atlanta and GT Police
  * 10 - 12 officers patrolling 24/7
  * Launch of SkyCop
  * “See Something? Say Something” Campaign
  * Automated Stingerette system from laptops or smartphones
  * New co-branded squad car
  * HAWK Pedestrian crossing on North Avenue

In addition we are partnering with the Atlanta Police Department,
Midtown Blue and the Georgia State Patrol.

If you have not done so already, I encourage you to sign up for our new
Jacket Guardian system, a security service provided free of charge to
the campus community. An app for it was developed by our students.


          *Clery Act Safety Alerts*

Because Georgia Tech is an open, urban campus with many students living
in surrounding Atlanta neighborhoods, we take a very proactive stance
when it comes to notifying the campus community about safety concerns.
For that reason, we are probably in the news more than some other
universities.

For example, the Clery Act requires universities to alert the campus
community of incidents occurring on campus. Georgia Tech expands that to
include areas adjacent to the campus, something that other universities
sometimes choose not to do. In the past two years, more than 70 percent
of the incidents triggering Clery Act alerts from Georgia Tech have
occurred off campus. While this policy increases the number of alerts
issued and prompts some negative attention, our first priority is to
ensure that our students, faculty and staff are both aware and vigilant.

We are having some success - compared to the first seven months of 2008,
property crimes the current year are down 48 percent and violent crimes
are down 62 percent. This is good news, but one crime is one too many
and we continue to work to improve the safety of our campus and
surrounding areas and to encourage our students to practice safe
behaviors, and to help us by reporting any suspicious activities.


          *Student Led Campus Safety Campaign*

Our students are on board, and in fact have taken the initiative to
create a student-led campus safety campaign. They have a number of
special activities planned for September 4-7. Details can be found on
their Facebook page, Georgia Tech Campus Safety Campaign.


          *Power of Partnerships*

The power of partnerships is a theme that permeates all of Georgia Tech.
A sterling example is Campaign Georgia Tech
<http://development.gatech.edu/campaign-georgia-tech>. To date, we have
raised $1.16 billion towards our goal of $1.5 billion by December 2015.

While state support is declining, the outstanding support we receive
from our alums and other partners is helping us realize the goals
outlined in our Strategic Plan, and to achieve a level of excellence
that would otherwise not be possible. The Campaign is helping us to add
endowed chairs and professorships and to continue to attract and retain
the very best faculty.

Prior to the start of the campaign, one in eight faculty held endowed
chairs, today it is one in six and our goal is for one in four
tenure-track faculty to hold an endowed chair or professorship.

In addition, the Campaign will allow us to provide scholarships for
undergraduate students and fellowships for graduate students, in order
to ensure that any qualified student can come to Georgia Tech. And
finally, it will allow us to continue to construct and renovate existing
facilities to ensure that we can continue to offer the best possible
education to our students.

This past summer Ernest “Ernie” Scheller Jr. made a transformational
gift of $50 million to our college of business
<http://www.gatech.edu/newsroom/release.html?nid=134491>. Mr. Scheller,
a 1952 Industrial Management graduate, credits Georgia Tech for teaching
him to be disciplined and focused in everything he did.

The Scheller College of Business is already ranked No. 8 among public
business schools in the nation, and as we celebrate the 100th year of
our management program, the Scheller’s generosity will help position our
program for continued global prominence.

We are achieving powerful results through our partnerships with
business, industry, government and non-profit organizations. In June
Children’s Healthcare of Atlanta and Georgia Tech announced a $20
million joint investment to strengthen our commitment to developing
technological solutions in the area of pediatric health care.

Research will include everything from nanomedicine and regenerative
medicine to innovative approaches for healthcare delivery.


          *Research*

We believe that much of the research that will change our world will be
interdisciplinary in nature, and as a result we continue to work to
create the world’s foremost innovation ecosystem that incorporates the
pursuit of “game changing” research and then helps to move the results
toward commercialization. This will provide our industry partners with a
competitive advantage, while benefiting the economy and society.

Our industry partners often tell us that while they value the research
taking place here at Georgia Tech, they especially value the access to
our students. They tell us that they bring a new level of creativity and
innovative thinking, and are job-ready upon graduation.

As we embark on our exciting new research strategy, one that will move
us beyond the traditional models in place at other research
universities, we have identified 12 areas that will make it easier for
the outside world to better understand all that we do.


          *Focus Areas *

  * Big Data
  * Bioengineering and Bioscience
  * Electronics and Nanotechnology
  * Manufacturing, Trade, and Logistics
  * Materials
  * National Security
  * Paper Science and Technology
  * People and Technology
  * Public Service, Leadership, and Policy
  * Robotics
  * Sustainable Infrastructure Systems

This list is not all-inclusive. We anticipate that it will evolve as our
research evolves and grows. By aligning and integrating our resources,
and presenting our research activities in a market-focused way, it will
become even easier for Georgia Tech to work with and clearly communicate
our areas of expertise to our partners in government and industry.

Let me share a couple of examples of how our innovation ecosystem is
coming together. In energy, we will soon open our new Carbon Neutral
Energy Solutions Building.

We are partnering with GE Energy on the Smart Grid Challenge, a student
competition and Tim Lieuwen, in his role as director of the Strategic
Energy Institute, will lead our overall energy strategy.

In addition, Georgia Tech is a major player in advanced manufacturing.
The Manufacturing Research Center under the leadership of Ben Wang is
targeting specific industry needs in manufacturing, by forming
collaboratories — pilot plants or prototype shops between industry,
government and academia.

MaRC has recently morphed into The Manufacturing Institute, which
represents a broader mission that includes accelerated technology
translation, for innovative manufactured products. It is really all
about competitiveness and impact.


          *Innovation Ecosystem*

Georgia Tech is partnering with the City of Atlanta, the State, and
business and industry to create a culture of innovation. We are actively
and aggressively working to commercialize the technologies developed at
Tech, moving the discoveries made in our laboratories to the
marketplace, and building the companies that will create jobs, drive our
economy, and stimulate economic growth.

We’re also committed to helping individuals in the community transform
their intellectual property to drive innovation.

Technology Square has become a high-energy hub, bringing together needed
resources, expertise, and opportunities for collaboration that creates
an exciting environment for innovation to flourish. Georgia Tech
continues to work closely with the Georgia Department of Economic
Development headquartered in Tech Square to attract new business and
industry. The Centergy Building is home to about 40 companies, and
several other organizations are exploring having a presence there. You
can almost feel the energy that is building.

In May Panasonic announced that it would locate its new automotive
innovation center in Centergy One in Tech Square, creating an incubator
for next generation automotive infotainment technologies. A driving
factor was their interest in enhancing partnerships with Georgia Tech,
including EI^2 <http://innovate.gatech.edu/>.

Tech Square is home to Flashpoint <http://flashpoint.gatech.edu/>,
Tech’s latest startup accelerator, and of course ATDC
<http://www.atdc.org>, the nation’s first university based technology
incubator, and widely regarded as one of the best.

Just last month Georgia Tech was selected for a leadership role in the
National Science Foundation’s I-Corps program
<http://www.gatech.edu/newsroom/release.html?nid=140891>. Tech, along
with Stanford and the University of Michigan, is a founding network node
for I-Corps, which aims to develop scientific and engineering
discoveries into useful technologies, products and processes.


          *Student Innovation*

I think the real excitement comes from what our students are doing. They
are an active part of research and discovery, and today over 70 percent
of innovation disclosures at Tech name one or more students among the
inventors.

We are continuing to offer programs to foster innovation and
entrepreneurship, such as the Georgia Tech Integrated Program for
Startups
<http://www.industry.gatech.edu/innovators-entrepreneurs/integrated-programs-startups/>,
TI:GER <http://tiger.gatech.edu/>, an award winning program and
partnership between Georgia Tech and Emory University School of Law; and
the InVenture Prize <https://inventureprize.gatech.edu/>, an annual
competition that inspires undergraduate students to create inventions
for cash prizes. Many of those innovations from the past three years
have already been commercialized.


          *Athletics*

Athletics continues to be an important part of the campus culture. More
than 400 student athletes represent Georgia Tech in 17 intercollegiate
varsity sports. In addition, several represented the U.S. and other
countries in the summer Olympics in London.

We had a number of things to celebrate last year. Our baseball team won
its eighth ACC championship, and the golf team won its fourth. Our
football team earned a post-season bowl bid for the 15th season. Our
women’s basketball team made the sweet 16 for the first time in Tech
history. And, members of the men’s and women’s track team members broke
several school records.

Georgia Tech is a challenging institution and because of that, we’re
especially proud of their academic accomplishments. The average team GPA
is over 3.0 for all of the women’s teams, and for half of the men’s
teams. This past May, all five of the seniors on the women’s basketball
team graduated in four years. Athletes participate in the Total Person
Program to help them develop professionally, socially and intellectually.


          *Challenges*

While there are many positive things happening, higher education is in
the public spotlight because of Integrity and accountability issues,
anticipated challenges in federal support, dwindling state support due
to economic pressures and rising student debt.

Still, today, a Georgia Tech education remains one of the best
investments a student can make. This was reaffirmed in the past spring
when BusinessWeek ranked Georgia Tech number two in the nation
<http://www.gov.gatech.edu/news/release.html?nid=125491>, and first in
the state of Georgia, in annualized return on investment. According to
the survey results compiled by Payscale.com, Georgia Tech was one of 24
schools whose graduates earned in excess of $1 million over 30 years.

Because of the generosity of Georgia Tech alumni and other supporters,
we are able to provide numerous academic, athletic, and needs-based
scholarships, including the G. Wayne Clough Georgia Tech Promise
<http://www.promise.gatech.edu/>. Students can help defray costs through
programs like cooperative education, mentioned earlier. We remain
sensitive to costs for students, and continue to develop ways to help
make a Georgia Tech education within reach of every qualified student.

Earlier this month I distributed a letter to the campus community in an
effort to keep you informed about the latest developments regarding
Tech’s financial outlook. The Office of Planning and Budget in the
Governor’s office required the University System of Georgia, as well as
most state agencies, to submit a three percent reduction plan for FY13
and FY14.

For Georgia Tech, this amounts to a reduction of just under $6 million
for each of the two years. Through careful planning, we are hopeful that
we can handle these reductions centrally for this budget year. It will,
however, significantly limit our ability to undertake new initiatives.

As in the past, our priority is to preserve the value of the degrees
that we award to students, and we will continue to support our core
areas that have made Tech what it is today. In the past three years, we
have created 53 new faculty positions – these are not replacement
positions, but new ones. We will continue our commitment to reduce class
size when possible and to provide needed resources for learning
throughout the Institute.


          *Institutional Effectiveness*

One of the five goals outlined in the Strategic Plan is to relentlessly
pursue institutional effectiveness. Achieving this goal can facilitate
all aspects of our business, including both the academic and research
operations.

For maximum effectiveness, it requires a common definition and
conversation, including the right people, the right tools and the right
culture. To begin implementation, Steve Swant’s team identified a
cross-institutional working group tasked with soliciting input from the
campus, drafting a plan, socializing the concepts and principles and
proposing actions going forward.

Critical success factors are the desire for change, the freedom and
discipline to be a learning organization, and managing expectations of
the community. There will be some things that we implement that are an
immediate win. There are others that require improvements. The goal is
to create the best platform for academic and research success.


          *Close*

Thank you for your engagement today. In closing, I want to share
something from our Strategic Plan created by the Georgia Tech community.

“All universities educate students, and most pursue research. Great
universities also lead. They lead in education, by defining what and how
we teach, and by understanding how our students learn.

They lead in research — by creating new knowledge and by identifying new
solutions, new directions for research, and new ways in which we
perceive the world around us. In short, great universities help shape
the world, rather than being shaped by it.”

Thanks to your diligence and hard work, we are well on our way. Thank
you again for all you are doing to help position this great Institute as
a world leader.